<pre>
  BIP: not assigned yet
  Title: Automatic Encrypted Wallet Backups
  Author: Oleg Andreev <oleganza@gmail.com>
  Status: Draft
  Type: Standards Track
  Created: 2014-08-06
</pre>

==Abstract==

This BIP describes a scheme to encrypt, identify and decrypt wallet backups using a wallet's master key.

==Motivation==

Hierarchical wallet scheme ([[bip-0032.mediawiki|BIP 32]]) allows user to back up the master key 
only once in a convenient location under user's control. User can safely send and receive funds
without a need to back up his wallet after every transaction. Later all funds can be restored 
with just a single master key that could have been backed up in the past.

The problem arises when the wallet needs to store additional metadata about transaction (e.g. custom notes 
or scripts for redeeming P2SH payments), those must be backed up as soon as possible or even as a prerequisite 
to a transaction. Frequently asking the user to back up their wallet would be inconvenient.
However, we may encrypt the wallet with high-entropy key derived from the wallet's master key and 
back up the encrypted wallet on a convenient 3rd party service (or services) automatically. 
This automatic backup could be retrieved and decrypted with a master key when the user restores the wallet
from his personal backup.

Since automatic backups are not encrypted with keys derived from the user's password, but with key derived
from unpredictable 256-bit master key, it is safe to put such backup on any service. The only requirement is 
availability: the service must be available when the user requests the backup.


==Specification==

This scheme uses purpose code 81 (see [[bip-0043.mediawiki|BIP 43]]) to derive necessary keys 
that are used as follows (apostrophe means hardened derivation):

TODO: replace 81 with this BIP's code when it is assigned.

Authentication Key (m/81'/0) is used to identify the wallet and sign its encrypted content (non-hardened derivation).

Encryption Key (m/81'/1') is used to encrypt/decrypt the backup.

Initialization Vector Key (m/81'/2'/i') is used to generate an unpredictable IV for each backup. Wallet software is free to choose any random IV (or even the same one every time), but this BIP provides a good default method that does not use RNG on the device and yet provides unique IV per each backup.


===How to encrypt the wallet===

* Generate authentication key by deriving EC key from master key with the following path: m/81'/0' (see [[bip-0032.mediawiki|BIP 32]]).
* Generate encryption key by deriving EC key from master key with the following path: m/81'/1'. Take the binary representation of the private key exponent as a 256-bit AES encryption key. If it is too short, pad it with 0x00 bytes from the end until the key is 256 bits long.
* Generate initialization vector by deriving it using path m/81'/2'/i' (i is incremented for each backup and stored within the wallet). Take the last 128 bits of the compressed public key as an IV.
* Serialize wallet in a binary string according to the wallet software format. 
* Encrypt the wallet using AES-CBC and PKCS7 padding and an initialization vector. Do not include extra 128 bits of the output (used for chaining with next blocks in CBC mode).
* Compose the following Encrypted Payload (|| denotes concatenation): 

  Version || Timestamp || IV || LengthPrefix || WalletCiphertext || CompactSignature

Where:

* Version byte is the encryption version. 81 (0x51) is the first version, equal to this BIP number.
* Timestamp is a 4-byte unix timestamp marking a date when the backup was created. This allows the wallet to check if the backup is fresh enough to be decrypted and imported.
* IV is a 16-byte Initialization Vector for AES-CBC.
* LengthPrefix is 4-byte little-endian length prefix for the ciphertext that follows.
* WalletCiphertext is wallet serialized content encrypted with AES-CBC using PKCS7 padding. Does not include extra 16 bytes emitted for chaining with additional data.
* CompactSignature is a fixed-length 65-byte signature of all the preceding bytes (including version byte) created according to "CompactSignature" algorithm in Bitcoin Core. Authentication pubkey is derived from the signature itself.

Total length is 1 + 4 + 16 + 4 + 65 + ciphertext length (90 bytes of metadata + ciphertext length). 

The produced string can be safely backed up on any server without risk of being decrypted by bruteforce (as long as the master seed of the wallet is not itself produced from a passphrase and contains at least 128 bits of entropy).

Note 1: to decrypt the wallet, user needs to restore his master key from his personal backup. 

Note 2: IV is deterministic, but not static. Wallet is supposed to increment IV's derivation index for each backup (using m/81'/2'/i' path) .

Note 3: Authentication key is not hardened so the wallet may keep it's pubkey in memory and verify various payloads without annoying the user with password inputs or fingerprint scanning. For the same reason the timestamp is provided right within the payload. HMAC would require keeping the secret in memory while ECDSA verification only needs a public key.


===How to decrypt the wallet===

User must have master key available already (e.g. from his personal backup).

* Derive the authentication pubkey from the extended public key m/81' using path m/81'/0.
* Request the latest backup identified by that authentication pubkey from a backup service. Use Hash160 of the pubkey as a unique identifier.
* Receive the encrypted payload from a backup service.
* Check the signature using authentication key. If the signature is invalid, reject the backup.
* Request user permission to unlock master private key to derive private keys from it.
* Derive an Encryption Key from the master key.
* Decrypt the wallet ciphertext using Encryption Key and IV from the payload.

Wallet application may check the timestamp within the payload to determine how old is the backup and reject it if it becomes obsolete before even attempting to decrypt it.


==TODO==

* Does it make sense to extend the BIP with encrypting the wallet with a password, so we have a single standard for initial (or manual) wallet backup protected by the user's passphrase (or some external key) and for automatic backups?
* It would be nice to standardize a simple (optionally paid) backup service API over HTTP.


==Implementations==

TODO: list implementations in various languages and libs.


==Test Vectors==

FIXME: these strings are fake. To be replaced by results from the reference implementation.

Test vector 1:

  Inputs:
    Decrypted contents (interpret as ASCII string): "seed:test1 iv:0"
    Wallet master seed: "test1"
    IV index: 0
  
  Outputs:
    Authentication private key: ca978112ca1bbdcafac231b39a23dc4da786eff8147c4e72b9807785afee48bb  
    Encryption key:             3e23e8160039594a33894f6564e1b1348bbd7a0088d42c4acb73eeaed59c009d
    IV:                         2e7d2c03a9507ae265ecf5b5356885a53393a2029d241394997265a1a25aefc6
    Encrypted payload:          5153e0bb460dcbeac079df17080750b81881846b0df3dd1568d0f631ca1ddba8db3bcfcb9e057cdc9800000010ebbfb53547b778a125159d0de39c0be04302a651bd9a6b94a9bd378ce65f5a8e490387b5e99addebedd46bd20356d7ff01f4baf901d1b9fcc11a9d3c714fda524455a9875aececc7a30b202a058bc696e6

Test vector 2:

  Inputs:
    Decrypted contents (interpret as ASCII string): "seed:test1 iv:1"
    Wallet master seed: "test1"
    IV index: 1

  Outputs:
    Authentication private key: ca978112ca1bbdcafac231b39a23dc4da786eff8147c4e72b9807785afee48bb  
    Encryption key:             3e23e8160039594a33894f6564e1b1348bbd7a0088d42c4acb73eeaed59c009d
    IV:                         ef53a63a4897219bef334105e2858a0261320132c246f438dade07f3ab565165
    Encrypted payload:          5153e0bb460dcbeac079df17080750b81881846b0df3dd1568d0f631ca1ddba8db3bcfcb9e057cdc9800000010ebbfb53547b778a125159d0de39c0be04302a651bd9a6b94a9bd378ce65f5a8e490387b5e99addebedd46bd20356d7ff01f4baf901d1b9fcc11a9d3c714fda524455a9875aececc7a30b202a058bc696e6

Test vector 3:

  Inputs:
    Decrypted contents (interpret as ASCII string): "seed:test2 iv:3"
    Wallet master seed: "test2"
    IV index: 3

  Outputs:
    Authentication private key: 7aead8c7990168bb80b1b4b65d307a87bcd63296bf8e0d0356d66cdf20a12f9a  
    Encryption key:             d0fb39932953529e5bd0d33597eac7daf38d2243c2a8da5a8286acb35a350634
    IV:                         eb662aca27c645559e4ae0ab917ab3a6e9d544a2b904b6bfb4d9cd6e6b813c7d
    Encrypted payload:          5153e0bb460dcbeac079df17080750b81881846b0df3dd1568d0f631ca1ddba8db3bcfcb9e057cdc9800000010ebbfb53547b778a125159d0de39c0be04302a651bd9a6b94a9bd378ce65f5a8e490387b5e99addebedd46bd20356d7ff01f4baf901d1b9fcc11a9d3c714fda524455a9875aececc7a30b202a058bc696e6




